docs: document the backup/restore ZIP archive format (#604)
openedx/openedx-learning: docs/openedx_content/backup_restore.rst

.. _backup-restore-format:

Backup / Restore Format
=======================

The ``backup_restore`` applet lets you export a learning package (V2 content
library) to a portable ZIP archive and restore it on the same or a different
Open edX instance.

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Overview
--------

A backup ZIP is a self-contained snapshot of one learning package.  It captures
every component, collection, container (sections / subsections / units), static

> asset, and version history that existed at export time.

Author: Fixed. Updated the overview to clarify that only the current draft and published versions are exported — the full version history is not preserved.

        ├── <container-slug>.toml            # sections, subsections, units
        └── xblock.v1/
            └── <block-type>/               # e.g. html, problem, video
                ├── <uuid>.toml             # entity metadata + version list
                └── <uuid>/
                    └── component_versions/
                        └── v<N>/
                            ├── block.xml   # XBlock content (XML)
                            └── static/     # media assets referenced by block.xml

File Format Reference
---------------------

package.toml
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Located at the root of the archive.  Contains two sections:

``[meta]`` — archive metadata (not restored to the database, for inspection only):

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 15 60

   * - Field
     - Required
     - Description
   * - ``format_version``
     - yes
     - Integer schema version; currently ``1``
   * - ``created_by``
     - no
     - Username of the operator who ran the export
   * - ``created_by_email``
     - no
     - Email address of the exporting user
   * - ``created_at``
     - yes
     - UTC timestamp when the archive was created
   * - ``origin_server``
     - no

>      - Hostname of the CMS instance that produced the archive

Author: Fixed. Changed the description to "Free-form string identifying the origin CMS instance (typically a hostname or URL; stored as-is with no format validation)".

``[learning_package]`` — library data (restored to the database):

> 

Author: Fixed. Updated the section heading to: "library data (restored to the database, with caveats: `key` may be overridden by the caller and `updated` is not applied during restore)".

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 15 60

   * - Field
     - Required
     - Description
   * - ``title``
     - yes
     - Human-readable name of the library
   * - ``key``
     - yes
     - Package reference string, e.g. ``lib:MyOrg:MyLib``
   * - ``description``
     - yes
     - Free-text description (may be blank)
   * - ``created``
     - yes
     - UTC timestamp when the library was originally created
   * - ``updated``
     - yes

>      - UTC timestamp of the library's last modification

Author: Fixed. Added a note to the `updated` field: "written to the archive for reference; **not** applied during restore".

Example::

    [meta]
    format_version = 1
    created_by = "lp_user"
    created_by_email = "lp_user@example.com"
    created_at = 2025-10-05T18:23:45.180535Z
    origin_server = "cms.test"

    [learning_package]
    title = "Library test"
    key = "lib:WGU:LIB_C001"
    description = ""
    created = 2025-08-19T04:25:10.988166Z
    updated = 2025-08-19T04:25:10.988166Z

Component entity TOML (``entities/xblock.v1/<type>/<uuid>.toml``)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each XBlock component gets one TOML file.

``[entity]``:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 15 60

   * - Field
     - Required
     - Description
   * - ``can_stand_alone``
     - yes
     - Whether this component can be used independently (almost always ``true``)
   * - ``key``
     - yes
     - Entity reference in the form ``xblock.v1:<type>:<uuid>``
   * - ``created``
     - yes
     - UTC creation timestamp

``[entity.draft]`` / ``[entity.published]`` — each contains ``version_num``
pointing at the current draft or published ``[[version]]`` entry respectively.
If a section is absent the entity has no draft or published version.

> 

Author: Fixed. Updated to clarify that `[entity.published]` is **always present** — when the entity has no published version it is written as an empty table with an explanatory comment (matching `toml.py` lines 107–112). `[entity.draft]` is the section that may be absent.

``[[version]]`` — one entry per saved version, in ascending ``version_num`` order:

> 

Author: Fixed. Changed to "at most two entries: the current draft version first, then the current published version if it differs from draft. The full version history is not stored."

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 15 60

   * - Field
     - Required
     - Description
   * - ``title``
     - yes
     - Display name of the component at this version
   * - ``version_num``
     - yes
     - Monotonically increasing integer starting at 1

Example::

    [entity]
    can_stand_alone = true
    key = "xblock.v1:html:e32d5479-9492-41f6-9222-550a7346bc37"
    created = 2025-08-19T04:25:43.685529Z

    [entity.draft]
    version_num = 5

    [entity.published]
    version_num = 4

    # ### Versions

    [[version]]
    title = "Text"
    version_num = 4

    [[version]]
    title = "Text"

>     version_num = 5

Author: Fixed. Swapped the `[[version]]` entries in the example so draft (v5) appears first, then published (v4), matching the actual output of `get_versions_to_write()`.

.. _backup-restore-format:

Backup / Restore Format
=======================

> The ``backup_restore`` applet lets you export a learning package (V2 content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``backup_restore`` applet lets you back up a learning package (V2 content
```

We're intentionally trying to use "backup/restore" to distinguish it between incremental import/export functionality that we plan to add in the future.

Author: Updated to use "back up" consistently. That distinction from future incremental import/export will matter.

library) to a portable ZIP archive and restore it on the same or a different
Open edX instance.

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Overview
--------

> A backup ZIP is a self-contained snapshot of one learning package.  It captures

Reviewer: We should clarify the difference between a Learning Package and a Library. Namely, that a Library has one and only one Learning Package where it stores its content, but Learning Packages can also stand alone. The restore process creates a temporary Learning Package that can be reviewed by the user, and then later associates that Learning Package with a newly created Library.

Author: The doc was using the two interchangeably — I'll add a note to the Overview explaining: a Library holds exactly one Learning Package; Learning Packages can also exist independently. The restore flow reflects this — it first creates a standalone Learning Package for inspection, then the user associates it with a new Library.

> every component, collection, container (sections / subsections / units), and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
every component, collection, container (section / subsection / unit), and
```

static asset.  For each component and container, only the current draft and
published versions are exported — the full version history is not preserved.

The archive uses `TOML <https://toml.io>`_ for all metadata files and keeps the

> actual XBlock content as XML (the same ``block.xml`` format Studio has always

Reviewer: ```suggestion
component XBlock content as XML (the same OLX format Studio has always
```

In modulestore, the XML files are not named `block.xml`. Also, the old XML format is being kept for components (e.g. problems, videos), but not for structural container types like units and subsections.

Reviewer: Also, it's probably worth noting that the naming is different--in courses, each component would be exported with it's block_id as the name of the file. That's usually a machine-generated ID (since that's the default in Split) but sometimes it's a meaningful identifier when authored by hand. For our export format, it the OLX is always `block.xml`, and it's the metadata in the parent TOML file that gives the identifier.

Author: I'll add a note in the `block.xml` section clarifying that unlike the old modulestore OLX export (where each component file was named by its `block_id`), this format always uses `block.xml` with the identifier recorded in the parent TOML. That should help readers familiar with the old format understand the difference.

Author: Applied — "OLX format" is more precise and the "component" qualifier correctly limits the claim to XBlocks, not structural containers.

   to the schema will increment this number so that tooling can detect them
   before attempting a restore.

Exporting a Package
-------------------

Management command (recommended for operators)::

    python manage.py lp_dump <package_ref> output.zip
    python manage.py lp_dump <package_ref> output.zip --username admin --origin_server cms.example.com

Python API::

    from openedx_content.api import create_zip_file

    create_zip_file(
        package_ref="lib:MyOrg:MyLibrary",
        path="/tmp/my_library.zip",
        user=request.user,          # optional – recorded in package.toml
        origin_server="cms.example.com",  # optional
    )

Restoring a Package
-------------------

Management command::

    python manage.py lp_load output.zip <username>

Python API::

    from openedx_content.api import load_learning_package

    result = load_learning_package(path="/tmp/my_library.zip")
    if result["status"] == "error":
        print(result["log_file_error"].getvalue())

.. note::

   ``load_learning_package`` accepts an optional ``package_ref`` argument.
   When provided it overrides the ``key`` stored in ``package.toml``, which

>    is useful when importing a library under a new reference.

Reviewer: We should use stronger language here. It's really dangerous to trust the archive for either the package_ref or the user, and callers should explicitly pass those to `load_learning_package` unless they really, really know what they're doing.

Author: Updated — I'll add an explicit warning that callers should always pass `package_ref` rather than relying on the key in the archive, since trusting untrusted archive content is a security risk.

pointing at the current draft or published ``[[version]]`` entry respectively.
``[entity.draft]`` is absent when the entity has no draft.
``[entity.published]`` is **always present** — when the entity has no
published version it is written as an empty table with an explanatory comment
(see the container example below).

``[[version]]`` — at most two entries: the current draft version first, then
the current published version if it differs from draft.  The full version
history is not stored.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 15 60

   * - Field
     - Required
     - Description
   * - ``title``
     - yes
     - Display name of the component at this version
   * - ``version_num``
     - yes
     - Monotonically increasing integer starting at 1

Example::

    [entity]
    can_stand_alone = true
    key = "xblock.v1:html:e32d5479-9492-41f6-9222-550a7346bc37"
    created = 2025-08-19T04:25:43.685529Z

    [entity.draft]
    version_num = 5

    [entity.published]
    version_num = 4

    # ### Versions

    [[version]]
    title = "Text"
    version_num = 5

    [[version]]
    title = "Text"
    version_num = 4

> Container entity TOML (``entities/<slug>.toml``)

Reviewer: We should explain what a `<slug>` is: This is the last part of the `entity_ref` if there is no collision, but if the last parts of the entity_ref collide (e.g. a Unit and an HTMLBlock that are both "intro"), then a short hash gets appended.

Author: I'll add an explanation: `<slug>` is derived from the last segment of the `entity_ref`; when two entities share the same last segment (e.g. a Unit and an HTMLBlock both named "intro"), a short hash is appended to keep filenames unique.

    # unpublished: no published_version_num

    [entity.container.section]

    # ### Versions

    [[version]]
    title = "Section1"
    version_num = 2

    [version.container]
    children = ["subsection1-48afa3"]

Collection TOML (``collections/<key>.toml``)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 15 60

   * - Field
     - Required
     - Description
   * - ``title``
     - yes
     - Collection display name
   * - ``key``
     - yes
     - Unique key within the library
   * - ``description``
     - yes
     - Free-text description (may be blank)
   * - ``created``
     - yes
     - UTC creation timestamp
   * - ``entities``
     - yes
     - List of entity reference strings (``xblock.v1:<type>:<uuid>``)

Example::

    [collection]
    title = "Collection test1"
    key = "collection-test"
    description = ""
    created = 2025-08-19T04:25:27.754968Z
    entities = [
        "xblock.v1:html:e32d5479-9492-41f6-9222-550a7346bc37",
        "xblock.v1:problem:256739e8-c2df-4ced-bd10-8156f6cfa90b",
    ]

XBlock content (``component_versions/v<N>/block.xml``)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Standard XBlock XML, identical to what Studio stores internally.  Static assets

Reviewer: There is a difference in HTMLBlock storage. Namely, we don't currently support storing a separate HTML file, so we inline the HTML with CDATA. In courses, we'd have a tiny XML file for the HTMLBlock that pointed to the HTML file.

This is a limitation of our XBlock serialization, but one I hope we can fix before Willow.

Author: I'll add a caveat noting that HTMLBlock content is currently serialized inline (CDATA in the XML) rather than as a separate `.html` file, which differs from old course OLX exports. I'll flag it as a known limitation to be addressed.
